---
layout: post
title: Motorola Tried to Sue Me For Unlocking Phones
category: posts

excerpt: According to the DMCA, I could have faced up to 10 years in jail. Read the story, and why I started an petition to the White House to keep unlocking legal.
---

About six days ago I started started [a petition](https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/make-unlocking-cell-phones-legal/1g9KhZG7) to the White House to make unlocking cell phones legal. If you haven't signed it yet, please do. We need 50,000 more votes in order to get a response from the White House.

This post is a bit of backstory about why I'm particularly motivated by this case:

In September 2005, I received a cease and desist letter from Motorola for selling software to unlock their cell phones. The letter indicated that I was in breach of the DMCA for circumventing protection measures in their phones, the punishment for which was **up to 10 years in prison and a million dollars in fines**. At the time, I was a 3rd year student studying Physics at Oxford in the UK. The prospect of 10 years in prison was devestating. 

### Backstory: A Starving Student
I started unlocking phones after a typical entrepreneurial experience: I had a probem and figured out a solution. In my first year of college, I'd brought a cell phone from California with me to college. But I quickly found out that it refused to work with any British cell networks due to a software lock. Strapped for cash, and unwilling to pay for a new phone, I figured out how to change the Motorola firmware in order to unlock the phone.

Realizing that others were likely having the same problem as me, I worked with a Romanian programmer to create an application for Windows computers that allowed people to quickly and easily unlock their Motorola phones and use them with any carrier.  After my first year of college ended, I stayed an extra couple of weeks in our college dorms and launched the website (Cell-Unlock.com) in the Summer of 2004. It was a make-or-break moment: I was in a financial crunch and it was looking like I'd need to take out student loans to pay for tuition (I distinctly remember rescuing some almost-discarded frankfurters from a friend who was leaving the dorms for Summer break before I did).

Sales at first were slow. But everything I charged was pure profit, split between me and the Ukranian programmer. Things ramped up quickly though, I was in the fortunate position of being the only person selling something that customers wanted. By the time Autumn rolled around and college got back into swing, I was making about $50 a day - and I was ecstatic. 

What happened next was sheer luck. In the first semester of my second year at college, Motorola released the RAZR V3. Initially it was marketed as an exclusive fashion phone: the thinnest clamshell phone on the market, with an all-alumnium body. But Motorola eventually dropped the price, and the phone became a blockbuster: it sold more than 130 million units, becoming the best-selling clamshell phone in the world to date. To put that in perspective, compare it to the 250 million iPhones that have been sold across all models since Apple launched the first device in 2007.

So as you as might imagine, I made enough money to pay for college, and then some. Competitors had popped up a few months after I launched, so I didn't keep my status as a monopoly, but I was making great money. 

### The DMCA and Unlocking
The DMCA was passed in 1998 by a unanimous vote in the Senate. It criminalizes "production and dissemenation of technology, devices, or services intended to circumvent measures to control access to copyrighted material".

The idea that unlocking phones is "circumventing measures to controls access to copyrighted material" is a novel interpretation of the DMCA. Motorola weren't claiming that I was distributing any copyrighted software, but instead that my software unlawfully circumvented a measure controlling access to the phone's copyright-protected software.

There is a subtle but meaninful difference. In a universe in where Motorola's interpretation of the DMCA is valid, any company can create simple mechanisms to prevent a customer for using a device in any way except for that which the manufacturer intended.

Let's take an example: it's conceivable that a car manufacturer might put simple chips on each individual component of the car that is recognized by the car's electronic system. In and of itself, that's nothing special. But with Motorola's interpretation of the DMCA, it would be illegal for any other company to manufacture third-party replacement parts for that vehicle. The act of selling, or even simply installing, a third party component would be illegal.

Instinctively, we understand that once we've purchased a product, it's up to us how we use or modify it. Replacing the hard drive on a Macbook understandably invalidates our warranty, but it isn't, and shouldn't be, illegal.

### The Unlocking Exemption

Every three years, rulemaking proceedings are conducted by the Copyright Office to document whether noninfringing uses of copyright works are hampered by a prohibition. After the the Copyright Office makes it recommendations, the Library of Congress can create "classes of works" that users may access through circumvention without obtaining authorization from the copyright owner.

In 2009, after lobbying by the EFF, the Copyright Office and the Librarian of Congress added an exemption for unlocking cell phones. While it's not clear (and never tested in court) whether the DMCA actually outlaws unlocking, the exemption made it explicitly legal, and was a definite win for consumers. 

In October of 2012, the Librarian and Copyright Office decided to remove that exception, citing a decision in 2010 regarding fair use of software, and the fact that more factory unlocked phones are now available on the market.

### Why it matters
As of January 26th, unlocking is back in legal limbo, and until either a carrier or phone manufacturer takes someone to court, it won't be tested. As such, anyone unlocking their phone or providing unlocking services to consumers risks up to five or ten years in jail, respectively.

The upshot of this is the less consumer choice. If you're traveling abroad and want to use your current cell phone, you'll need to pay exorbitant roaming charges. As an example, AT&T charges customers $1.50 per minute for calls and and $19.50 per megabyte consumed while traveling in Europe. Compare that with the $0.30 per minute and $0.20 per megabyte that you'd be charged in the UK with a prepaid SIM card and an unlocked phone, and it amounts to extortion.

If you decide to change your carrier, say from AT&T to T-Mobile, the DMCA regulations mean that unless your carrier agrees to unlock your phone for you, you'll need to buy a new device. For this reason, manufacturers are also keen to keep their devices locked.

The decision to remove the exemption for unlocking phones is bad for consumers, and it's up to our elected officials to help defend consumer rights. Unfortunately in this case, the Library of Congress and the Copyright Office are staffed by unelected officials who aren't beholden to votes. So writing to your local congressional representatives or signing the White petition is the best way to make your voice as a consumer heard.


### Responding to Motorola
Being a scared 19 year-old, my immediate reaction was to shut down the company and move on, and I wrote a draft letter to Motorola indicating just that. But before I sent it off and shut down the site, I thought to reach out and see if their might be a lawyer who could help me figure out to respond.

After a series of no's, I finally connected with the wonderful [Jennifer Grannick](https://twitter.com/granick) at Stanford's Cyberlaw group. She helped me craft a series of letters back to Motorola, disputing their interpretation of the DMCA. Very fortunately for me, Motorola decided that a college student wasn't worth pursuing, and stopped responding to the letters. I'd gotten lucky a second time.

I was fortunate that Motorola weren't more motivated, and didn't take my case to court. The unlocking company I started still exists, now run by my brother. It made enough money to help me and my college friends bootstrap our next startup ([RepeaterStore](http://repeaterstore.com)), which in turn helped us bootstrap our latest company, [OpenSignal](http://opensignal.com). 

I'm not sure whether any others have been threatened in the same way, but it's only a matter of time until it happens again. This time around, a Verizon, AT&T, or Apple may have more perseverence, and it's very possible someone will end up in jail. 



















